hello if you have found the ideas i
discussed
interesting and useful perhaps you might
consider purchasing my recently released
book beyond order 12 more rules for life
available from penguin random house in
print
or audio format you could use the links
we provide below or
buy through amazon or at your local
bookstore
this new book beyond order provides what
i hope is a productive and
interesting walk through ideas that are
both philosophically and
sometimes spiritually meaningful as well
as being
immediately implementable and practical
beyond order can be read and understood
on its own
but also builds on the concepts that i
developed in my previous books
12 rules for life and before that
maps of meaning thanks for listening
and enjoy the podcast
[Music]
i'm very pleased today on this good
friday as it turns out to welcome
dr roland griffiths phd professor
in the departments of psychiatry and
neurosciences and director of the center
for psychedelic and consciousness
research at the johns hopkins university
school of medicine
and author or co-author of more than
400 scientific research publications and
i should let those of you who aren't
that familiar with scientific
enterprise know that um three
publications is roughly
equivalent to a phd thesis all things
considered in the
biologically oriented or psychologically
oriented research domain so that means
that
dr griffiths has been involved in
something approximating
150 phds and
if you just think about that for a
minute then you can understand what that
means
about 20 years ago he initiated a
research
program at johns hopkins which is one of
the world's foremost
universities investigating of all things
transformative psychedel psychological
experiences
the mystical type and insightful type
experiences occasioned
by the classic psychedelic psilocybin
the active component in what are
popularly
known as magic mushrooms his research
has indicated that
the participants in his studies rate
their experiences
of psilocybin use as among the five
most personally meaningful of their
lives
and later attribute to them enduring
positive changes in moods
attitudes and behaviors months to years
after the experience
he's also conducting a series of intense
related studies of brain imaging and
drug interactions examining the
pharmacological
and neural mechanisms of psychedelic
action
he's conducted a series of extremely
interesting
and well-received therapeutic studies
with psilocybin
including the treatment of psychological
distress in cancer patients and more
specifically fear of death
major depressive disorder nicotine
addiction so smoking cessation anorexia
nervosa
and various other psychiatric disorders
his research group has also conducted a
series of survey studies
characterizing both naturally occurring
and psychedelic occasion transformative
experiences including
mystical experience entity and god
encounter experiences
near-death experiences and
experiences that have been associated
with their
with those who have had them with
reduction in depression anxiety and
proclivity for substance use he's also
engaged in a series of ongoing studies
in healthy volunteers
in beginning in long-term meditators and
most interesting
as far as i'm concerned in practicing
religious leaders
and so well any one of those topics
would do for two hours but we're going
to try to delve into
as many as possible in the next in the
next
in this following conversation and so
thank you so much for
agreeing to talk to me i'm extremely
excited about this conversation and have
been
thinking about it for for weeks
well it's a great pleasure to uh to join
you
uh jordan uh uh you and i met
some uh 15 or 16 years ago
at a at a retreat in california uh
and uh and uh and and frankly
as this work has unfolded and as i've
followed
uh the your fascinating uh uh course
maps of meaning
and uh and your other
uh books i really became intrigued by
having a conversation with you about all
this and so
i'm very grateful uh for this
opportunity
and also uh delighted that you and tammy
are
are now back uh in in in the land of the
living
and atlanta in the land of the living
right
uh so yeah thank you yeah i was
i was really taken with our first
meeting i remember that that was just
before you were
about to publish the first of what are
really a series of revolutionary papers
and i would say revolutionary not only
for their findings but for the mere fact
that they're being conducted at
all i mean the psychedelics burst into
the west into western consciousness in
the late 1950s and caused
so much trouble and distress that they
were rapidly made illegal
and that was the end of research really
for
what 20 years more than that yeah more
than that
yeah and i thought that was a complete
catastrophe because as a psychologist
my sense was that the most interesting
possible domain of study for a truly
curious psychologist was the mystical
domain that appeared to be opened up by
these psychedelic substances which
indicated something that we do not
understand in my opinion
at all yeah
um absolutely right but by the time i
got to
uh graduate school that was university
of minnesota in
uh in the area of psychopharmacology
which is a
predecessor to neuroscience
the idea of studying psychedelics was
entirely off the table
as a matter of fact it was a considered
a third rail
issue to even suggest
interest in that it was a career
destroying interest
yeah yeah it was let alone a pursuit
well i was so interested meeting you and
when we met in california we went to
this conference on awe which
actually turned out to be quite a good
conference we was a small conference
there was about 30 of us if i remember
correctly
off for three days for the full days and
and
they're really a series of extremely
interesting um
experiences we did laughing meditation
at one point which i found extremely
interesting and
quite easy but i couldn't duplicate it
myself at home but i was really
struck by you in particular because
you're you're not there was nothing
about you
that i would have associated with the
probability
of restarting the psychedelic
the investigation into psychedelics in
in the scientific community and that
that's a compliment that's
the deepest compliment because it seems
to me that the reason you were able to
pull this off is because
your um what would you call it
surprisingly sensible and level-headed
and so that i'm very curious about
why it was that it was you that was able
to
get through all the regulatory social
career hurdles
psychological hurdles all of that
ethical hurdles and actually managed to
establish this research program and at
such a prestigious university
why do you think you were able to do
that you know
part of it was the innocence with which
i
came into the area so i i came into the
area
having initiated a meditation practice
and i had been
i was trained as a radical behaviorist
uh in psychopharmacology
you know and and which means uh that you
don't pay any attention to
uh uh you know motives or thoughts
uh those are irrelevant you want to
focus on
behavior that's yeah observable behavior
it's great scientific training to be
trained as a
rigorous behaviorist though yeah and
uh but even in graduate school i you
know i was
curious about interiority uh
and had tried to do some meditation but
like so many
uh when i tried it became
uh hopelessly difficult three minutes
felt like three hours
and so i set i set that aside i went
about
my uh developing my career in
psychopharmacology at johns hopkins
became
internationally prominent in drug abuse
pharmacology
and then 25 years ago
started a meditation practice again
and this time there was something
fundamentally different about it
and i don't know why but i engaged with
it and it became
really intriguing to me and there were
you know
uh states of consciousness that emerged
from that
getting me to ask questions about the
nature of
spiritual and transformative experience
uh
you know what's going on with meditation
i didn't have a strong
religious grounding or background a
matter of fact i had
flunked out of confirmation school and
in the sixth grade but there was
something
really compelling and it got me reading
about different meditation traditions
different religious traditions i was
trying to understand this whole area
of spirituality and then
came to be reintroduced and i was
reintroduced incidentally by bob
jesse who organized that conference we
went to
and he's a engineer who founded a group
called the council on spiritual
practices
and i got reintroduced to the idea well
you know roland if you're interested
in spiritual experience if you want to
investigate that
take another look at the psychedelics
and um
and and so i came into this
just out of raw curiosity uh
and and and frankly i i would have to
say
that my intrigue with the nature of
these
experiences was so compelling that
it made me question whether i should be
allocating all my
time to running around the world and
giving conferences and giving
papers and doing studies on the next uh
abuse liability
risk uh for a new uh uh for a new
compound
and so uh that in itself seems quite
remarkable okay so let me summarize that
to some degree so you you had your you
had rigorous scientific training and of
the
of the least mystical kind possible in
some sense because that's a good way of
characterizing behaviorism
no concentration whatsoever on
subjective experience and
the reduction of everything to
measurable uh to
to to that which can be objectively
measured and and
i would say like some of the most
impressive work ever done in psychology
was done by behaviorists like jeffrey
gray is a good example
he's an absolute genius and that all
came out of that behavioral tradition
and so did i think the field of
neuroscience itself so
you established and then you established
your credibility
methodologically but also as a
communicator within that domain so
what do you what do you think you had
for a publication record by the time
you started the meditation practice and
and followed this other interest
well i mean at that point i was a full
professor
i had a long history of publication
in drug abuse pharmacology and
and in that sense we did measure
subjective
effects and uh euphoria and and things
like that
um uh but i was i was
very well established in that field had
done also a whole
parallel set of studies in animal
behavior pharmacology
and drug abuse looking at physical
dependence and drug self administration
uh right so there was no there was no
way by that time of casually dismissing
any interest that you might manifest
you'd already established yourself and
as a highly credible researcher and so
that was a precondition for for the next
move
why do you think your interest in this
alternative domain let's say became so
intense that it was able to displace an
already developed expertise and a fully
functioning
career in this other direction what what
was going on
well there's there's something very
compelling about the nature of these
transformative experiences and that's
what you know we can
describe the kinds of uh effects that
emerge
with the psychedelics but you know more
than that in
in meditation in prayer practice
you know there's there really is uh
there arises a sense of the ineffable
and and there are a lot of things tied
to that
but uh but but meaning
is is uh integrally uh
uh involved in that and and that frankly
just became
so compelling to me as a matter of fact
it it kind of dwarfed my interest in
drug abuse pharmacology to the point
that i actually
considered at one point uh
dropping out of uh
uh the scientific academy and
and going off to india
uh to an ashram to do much more
intensive meditation practice so
were there exist were there existential
reasons for that
or was it merely a matter of where your
curio curiosity took you i mean
so i mean you had a you had a very well
established and
productive and i would presume
meaningful and engaging career
i don't know how you found the teaching
aspect of that were
was that rewarding to you as well or
were you more a pure researcher
a peer researcher okay okay but i mean
you had a fully functioning
professional life at that point but but
something gripped you
and were there personal reasons for that
or
do you think it was more a manifestation
of curiosity
i i i think it was raw curiosity but
you know one once one en
enters into that relationship of
investigating this mystery of
of of what it is that we're doing here
right i mean this is
it's it's kind of the core existential
mystery of being
that i think comes up in this this is my
framing now
at the time i didn't you know i didn't
know how to
even contextualize this i knew it was
something that emerged from meditation i
thought it had something
to do with what religious teachings were
about i couldn't
i had i just had no context for putting
that uh
together but it was it was super
compelling and it seems incredibly
important
and i would say if anything it's it's
at least uh you know that that interest
and the importance in it hasn't faded
one
bit for me so why did you decide then
instead of abandoning what you'd already
created and journeying
let's say to india to for the the second
half of your life
that that's how the unions would think
about it i suppose is the spiritual part
of your life
why did you decide to continue walking
down the scientific pathway and what do
you think of that decision
uh well i think it's one of the best
decisions i could have possibly made
um uh let's see
it uh it was what i knew i mean it was
all all the tools i had i i was in a
unique position i started reading the
literature on psychedelics and going huh
this is uh this is interesting
and i i wonder if this is true
and and frankly i went into that first
study and and this and this may have
made me an acceptable person to take
this on i went into that first study
with a deep sense of skepticism i was
very happy with
what i was learning about the nature of
these experiences from meditation
i was kind of put off by the what struck
me as
excessive enthusiasm among those
people who have continued to be engaged
in psychedelics
well enthusiasm means to be filled with
god's spirit so it's exactly the right
word for
for for people who've been by psilocybin
let's say
or hypothetically excessive enthusiasm
and of course that is a danger there's
no
it's not like there's any shortage of
religious manias
i mean that can manifest itself as part
of manic depressive disorder
and you see you see religious experience
of a sort often in schizophrenic
delusions as well so
it's not like there's no danger there
there's plenty of danger
i i i agree and and there there still
is um and the first study the first
study was
which one was that the first study was
uh looking at a high dose of
psilocybin and comparing it to
a fairly high dose of methylphenidate or
ritalin
under under very deeply blinded
conditions
so it's a good study because you used an
active placebo so to speak did you have
a placebo in there as well or was it
methylphenidate
versus psilocybin it was just straight
up comparing methylphenidate in
psilocybin but under deeply blinded
conditions where
people knew that in the course of two or
three sessions they would have at least
one session in which they would get a
dose of psilocybin
but they were also told that they could
get i think it was 13
other psychoactive compounds
we recruited in only people who had zero
prior experience with psychedelics so
because the allegedly the the profile of
subjective effects are so unique
uh that it that uh people could unblind
themselves
by taking in naive people we also
eliminated a potential recruitment bias
of people who were had good experiences
so we could actually
how did you convince the ethics
committees that it was
acceptable to you to first of all to do
this at all
and and also the administrators at your
university
and second that it was acceptable to use
naive
uh participants yeah why did why did
they why did they
and do you think that in today's climate
do you think that that study would now
be possible if
well let's say if you hadn't laid the
groundwork for it
you know i i think partly it was uh good
luck
and partly it it actually
speaks very well of johns hopkins and
their
ethic review procedures
so when i assembled that protocol with
some help
from the council on spiritual practices
and counseling from bob jesse
when i assembled that protocol i
actually thought that there's probably
less than a 50 percent chance it would
even be approvable
because because of these you know
ethical committees it has to go through
you know not only the hopkins ethical
committee but fda
and and fda hadn't approved a study
giving a high dose of a psychedelic to a
psychedelic naive individual
for i i don't know you know 25 plus
years decades
uh and uh and so it was no
means clear that it would even uh even
go but but it was
so interesting to me and as i said i was
losing
losing comparative interest in the other
things that i was doing
that i thought well you know why not um
the the ethical scrutiny that that got
was
as was unlike as you might imagine
unlike any
previous protocol or even any protocol
since it went through many levels of
scrutiny within uh my institution
johns hopkins including being looked at
by the dean
and the managing attorney's office and
and whatever
and i and i'm i have to say i'm very
proud of johns hopkins as an institution
it's stunning that they did it i can't
believe that they did it
i i can't what what what arguments did
you marshal
to to put up against because i mean it's
so easy for a committee to s if they see
risk just to say
no because no is simple the problem goes
away and no one's accountable for it
yes yes is complicated and so like how
did you convince them
this was a worthwhile endeavor
especially given your own skepticism at
that point
well it really came down to
a science and risk benefit ratio i think
the big risk
that most institutions would have caved
in on
is a political risk a reputational risk
you know what you know to be associated
with psychedelics
like that yeah look what leary did for
harvard
yeah exactly and but
uh the committee at hopkins that looked
at this uh really
put the the politics to one side
and and weighed the risk benefit ratio
to
uh to the volunteers what did they see
as the benefit
oh yeah in terms of just understanding
the
the nature let's see we put it forward
as a comparative pharmacology study
okay and so and we've done a lot of work
with comparative pharmacology
and in fact i had a grant from the
national institute on drug abuse
to compare one of my specialties at the
time was sedative hypnotics
and and i had a grant that had proposed
to compare
ketamine which is a nmda dissociative
anesthetic
with some other compounds
and um and so i i
modified it uh to say well we were going
to look at ketamine but i think we'll
look at psilocybin
and instead of comparing it to a classic
okay some mentalism there because
ketamine is already
like radically psychoactive although
perhaps not so much as
a pure psychedelic let's say so there
was some incrementalism and and you'd
already got support from granting
agencies and and
you had all your credibility behind you
yeah and
and so what we could what we could argue
is
we're we're looking at relative abuse
potential
uh here now the study as it's published
doesn't
read out as that but that that was
really
uh how it was designed as a classic
comparative pharmacology study
in which we could compare the effects of
psilocybin to methylphenidate in healthy
volunteers
we had you know we could look at things
right so that's like
that's i can see that that would be you
could make a mount a
pretty straightforward valid scientific
argument for that you have
methylphenidate which is a standard
psychomotor stimulant
basically dopaminergically mediated
something like cocaine and then you have
this strange
psychedelic and they're the the reason
they're addictive is not
or if they are and of course there's
tremendous discussion about that but
they they don't fit neatly into the
category of other abusable drugs and so
that's that is an issue that's worthy
it's very hard to get animals to
voluntarily take
psychedelics at least regularly whereas
you can do it with cocaine with no
problem
so i can see that that you can make a
basic science argument right there and
and you said also abuse potential okay
okay
okay fair enough i'm still stunned that
they managed it but
but it's so interesting to see how much
work and preparation and care
at all sorts of levels had to go into
that before it was made possible
and it it's also even possible that
maybe that caution was warranted because
one of the things that really strikes me
about your research program is that it
hasn't got out of hand
right i mean and that's what happened in
harvard in the early 60s when larry
started
playing around let's say with lsd which
you don't play around with
um you've been able to really keep this
within a tightly bound scientific box
while still um investigating and
popularizing
the the reality of the mystical
experience for the
participants okay so you you started the
study you had naive people
what happened um
well what happened
is uh is the story that actually
changed my career direction because the
results
you know i was interested in uh
spiritual experience uh i i
i put in questionnaires
into this study that had been used to
measure
naturally occurring mystical experiences
and ralph hood who may have been
a participant in the meeting that we
went to
i think we met ralph there yep yeah had
a nice
questionnaire um you know but
i i wasn't sure what to entirely what to
expect and and whether uh
the effects would would live up to the
what struck me as uh exaggerated
claims uh by the
psychedelic and enthusiast uh
populations
uh but indeed what happened was
uh under these blinded conditions and
both the guides were blinded
and the volunteers to what what drugs
were administered
uh uh other than on some session that
get a dose of
of psilocybin uh and um
and what emerges number one that uh
immediately during these sessions that
are done
uh after careful preparation so they're
they're really
curated experiences in which we meet
with volunteers for eight preparation
hours prior to the
session and then they come in they take
a capsule
we ask them to lay on a couch for the
duration of the session which can be up
to
eight hours six to eight hours we
encourage them to use blind
folds uh so that they're uh
so that their visual system is cut off
we have them use um earphones through
which they listen to a program
of of music and so it's an introverted
kind of do they select the music or do
you select it
we select it what were your guidelines
for selecting the music
well uh our our main guide
who played a very important role in our
initial study
was bill richards and he had actually
done psychedelic work at maryland
research center
back in the 1970s
and so he had a strong bias toward
western uh classical music
and so our initial playlist was very
strongly influenced in that direction
since that time any particular composers
like was it heavy on bach for example
well not particularly heavy but it it
yeah
it covered uh it covered a a range of
of uh classical composers uh
actually i'm focusing on that because i
mean
music and dancing are components of
psychedelic experiences
that stretch back tens of thousands of
years and so the fact that
it's easy to skip over these details in
some sense you had people lay down
their eyes were closed okay so they're
not they're not having a sociological
experience
of psilocybin they're having an interior
experience and then you use
music and god only knows what music does
in it
in the final analysis but um and it's
it's certainly the case that that you
know there isn't a tremendous amount of
space between classical music and
religious music
and so so there's also sorts of things
that you've done that are implicit in
the
uh experiment that are integral in some
some indeterminate sense to the outcome
now these preparation
sessions eight hours okay what are you
doing with people during those eight
hours
and why let's see the preparation
is is uh
really developing rapport and trust with
them these
these experiences are can be
hugely disorienting and they and
uh fear anxiety can arise
in at very strong magnitude
it's very important that people feel
safe
and cared for so i think of it that
we're trying to create a container
around these experiences they have to
trust
their we sometimes they're called guides
or sitters
they really have to implicitly trust
these people to
to take care of them okay so how
important do you think
you know because you said they have to
feel safe but i would
think that it's more that they have to
be safe
and you know what i mean that if this
this is why
psychological research in particular is
so likely to go astray because
its validity depends on on on
integrity in ways that aren't obviously
measurable or describable in a research
paper so
you know i would think and please
correct me if i'm wrong that if you
didn't have
exactly the right sort of people
qualified intelligent insightful
competent caring awake all of that and
dedicated to
actually taking care of the research
subjects like none of this can be a show
for that to work right because this can
go wrong very badly and it didn't go
wrong so
so to to to what degree
how did you select the people who were
going to serve as the as the
protector slash guides and and what were
you thinking about when you did that
so in that initial study bill richards
who i already mentioned
he came came in so so
bill c came in as someone who was
uh already a strong believer in the
power of these uh kinds of compounds so
we we actually he was a perfect person
to bring into uh
in that in that role and was he
associated with the council of spiritual
practice was he a bob jesse
contact he was yeah actually
you drew from that that domain of
expertise already
yeah yeah and he's and he's a
psychologist
in uh in the baltimore area and
now you know he he may very well be
uh among the absolutely most
experienced psychedelic
therapist in the world
so he he already came in with
substantial
experience he was our primary guide
throughout that first study and then
and he trained uh an assistant guide
who's with us
uh still mary casamano uh
and it was the pair of them that in
that very first study that provided that
uh rapport trust and support uh
before during and after and it's in the
aftercare is also
important uh but that that relationship
is
is critical and you're right people
they have to feel safe and they and they
have to be safe and
and and that's the value of doing this
under within the institutional structure
of something like hopkins
because people know that what we're
doing is giving them
a compound that that we know to be
psilocybin in this case synthesized
psilocybin in in capsules
and it's done with under medical
supervision and if anything went amiss
medically were yeah we're capable of
intervening
and and medical intervention is
very rare i mean these things these
drugs turn out to be
remarkably safe um
but they they can these kinds of
sessions
certainly can go off the rails and uh
and so that's the that's the nature of
that preparation and caring and
and being with them in the session we've
probably been
possibly more conservative than we need
to our
sessions even today involved two
sitters or guides there throughout the
whole duration of the
of the six or eight eight hours uh so
people are tucked into their couch
they're asked to go
inward uh we we're not
um we're not guiding the session per se
we're asking them to pay attention to
their own
experience as it unfolds we'll check in
with them
what about mindset like what what do you
tell the people about
how to prepare psychologically for the
experience
what how are they informed how what what
do you want how do you want them to
react
yeah let's see we want them to go in
and be deeply curious about what
they have to learn okay so you want them
to be open
and let it go and let it happen and you
say we'll take care of you but you can
let it happen
yeah yeah let it go be open trust
you know and and we and we prepare
them uh to
not necessarily expect but uh but not
rule out
the possibility that what may emerge
in during the session is something that
they'll find
absolutely terrifying or anxiety
producing okay so they know that
oh oh absolutely okay okay and so i
don't know how often do people encounter
so i mean the experiences are
exceptionally profound
and range across the full range of
emotional significance
in fact past the normal ranges of
emotional significance so
how frequently in the experience is the
negative end of the human experience
magnified
um actually quite frequently so in our
our first study about 30 percent of
volunteers
would have said actually rated
at the end of the study that sometime
during the experience they had an
experience of fear
of or anxiety that they would rate it
extreme
now very often those are short-lived
experiences
and to the extent that they drag out
over
long periods of the session
the outcomes are going to generally be
less
uh less favorable but i think it's a
it's actually a very sobering statistic
that in spite of all the
selection we do i mean we've already
screened out
people for whom we don't think we can
develop
rapport and trust we've screened out uh
individuals um uh
you know with borderline personality
disorder for instance
uh and so and and so we've already
selected a group
of people who are open and curious
we're giving them all this a time and
attention yet
about 30 percent will experience some
significant anxiety
during those sessions what's important
is that it's very very rare
for anyone who has a session of
under these kinds of conditions to
report
after the session that they feel as
though
their life satisfaction you know has
been
decreased most people even if they have
a difficult experience will interpret
that experience
in a context of meaningfulness and and
in some cases it's actually through the
doorway
of the uh the
the most difficult portions of the
experience
that the greatest learning comes up so
let's let's dive into that a little bit
i mean i know
historically i know it it appears as
though historically when people were
preparing for
experiences of this sort that they would
often go undergo a process
of of ritual purification and
and i i'm going to just abandon the
ritual part of that and assume that what
they were doing was
attempting some moral purification that
they were settling their accounts that
they were trying to
ensure that they didn't walk into the
experience with with karmic
excessive karmic baggage that they could
conceivably shed
that they were very careful to prepare
themselves so that
their consciences weren't weighing on
them any more heavily than they needed
to and
when people undergo these negative
experiences
but still emerge uh let's say
with the judgment that that was
worthwhile what
what's the essential nature of the
negative experience
i mean it's not contentless terror it's
it's
it's not that in unformed it's more
personal
well the interesting piece of it jordan
is it it can take
many many different forms so
um so you know one example that we give
is because psilocybin is a so
very often has a lot of visualizations
attached to it either
uh either imagery
and sometimes realistic imagery or
patterns or whatever
and we and so we'll say well for
instance
if and this can happen if during the
session
a demonic figure you know comes up and
starts to
approach you um
your your job is to be
interested in curious about it to
recognize that this
is a display of consciousness we
will often say there's nothing in
consciousness
per se that can hurt you and
and what you what we want you to be is
interested
in this and so instead of
refining an image in your mind so take
the demon
instead of reifying it and if you do
you'll either choose to run from it and
then you'll spend the entire session
running from
this demon that's going to annihilate
you until you're exhausted and the
psilocybin's gone
or alternatively you may choose to fight
it
but but by fighting it you've also
reified it uh
and what we really want you to do is be
really interested in it and be curious
about
it and so it's terrifying it's it's a
construct created by you
for you probably to turn to to terrify
you
uh and uh be interested
in it and and curious about it
and and it's through that recognition
through although the
hair on the back of your head may be
standing on
end you know we would much rather have
you
approach it and in effect
ask it what it's doing there what what
what am i to learn
from this and what the guarantee
is is that
what whatever the nature of that is and
it can take
any number of forms and it's not
necessarily a monster or just visual
but whatever it is is not is
not going to be static i mean unless you
reify it unless unless you make it
static
if you actually investigate it it's
going to start changing
and then initially it actually might
become more terrifying
but it can't it can't and won't continue
to do that it's going to dissolve and it
may dissolve into something
disgusting or beautiful or transcendent
or silly but it's going to change
and and your job is just to stay with
the
experience and recognize that you're
empowered in a way to approach
whatever it is that emerges in
consciousness and my my own sense i'd be
and i'd be very curious about how you
interpret this from a clinical
psychological
point of view but my my sense of that is
that
that's a hugely empowering experience
for people to have
that they have literally faced the
dragon they have faced the greatest
terror
whatever form it's taken and they and
they've come
out recognizing that they're they're
safe they're empowered
and that and that that can be a
a life-changing experience in and of
itself
because after you really have
been there with the with the the demon
the worst demon of your dreams and faced
it down
and and looked it in its eyes and
realized it's actually
nothing other than an object of
consciousness nothing other than
yourself
then what is it in life
that can put up an obstacle
with that much uh fear uh
for you it's it's very much like a
classic initiation ceremony i mean the
yeah i mean one thing that clinicians
have agreed upon
regardless of their school of thought
let's say
is that
voluntary exposure to what
to obstacles in your path that are
threatening or disgusting is
almost inevitably curative and
it seems that the rule is that that
which you
approach voluntarily shrinks as you
approach it and you
grow and and if you run the reverse
happens
and you can play that out very
straightforwardly if you're a
behaviorist because
if someone's afraid of an elevator then
you have them stand ten feet from the
elevator and then nine feet and then
eight feet and
not only do they learn that what they
learn is that they can withstand the
fear
that's what generalizes and you don't
get symptom substitution the way the
psychoanalysts thought because
you're probably not counter conditioning
the fear what you're doing is showing
the person that there's more to them
than they thought
and and there isn't anything more
salutary than that and that is precisely
why you're encouraged
let's say in mythological stories to
confront the dragon and get the gold
um that that's the basic story and it's
and the it's very interesting how that
becomes portrayed in a psychedelic
experience i mean
what do you make okay there's two
directions there i'd like to continue
the discussion of the study okay so
what happened to you as a consequence of
running this study and how did that
influence what you did and
and then what happened culturally as a
consequence of reporting this study
so i i i think the
the most interesting fi and unexpected
finding
for me uh was was i i was
deeply interested in the nature of that
initial experience but the most
interesting
thing to me occurred when people
returned two months later so this first
study
we were giving sessions at two month
intervals so
people would come in they would have
their session with you know they would
the guides would meet with them
intermittently beforehand
and then they would come back for the
second session they'd sit down in my
office and
and uh and this is just a vivid memory
it was
one of the very first volunteers and i
asked him well
so uh so you know what do you think of
the first session i'm just
curious as to what you're thinking and
the person said you know
i think about that uh every day
uh that's you know that's among the most
important experiences of my whole life
[Laughter]
and i thought what i mean now at this
point in my career
i've given uh you know dozens and dozens
of different psychoactive drugs to
people both healthy volunteers and drug
abusers
yet at high doses oh how high was the
dose in
like typically among street users two
grams is a moderate dose for psilocybin
of the actual mushroom
four grams i think five grams is what
terence mechanic called the heroic dose
isn't it
what kind of dose were you giving in
this is equivalent to
five gram dosage so this was not a
trivial
pharmacological experience like over the
top
well well it's an it's in it that's in
the description
where it's not it's not a beginner's
experience in some sense it's
it's the full-fledged thing yeah okay
how did you settle on the dose
well um well we we wanted to
provide a strong test of of what it was
that
uh psilocybin could do that that is the
same dose although we we met we did it
on a
a weight basis but it's the same dose uh
that walter panky gave in the famous
good friday experiment and given that
this is good friday
we can reference that that was the study
done in harvard
you know back in the very early 60s
uh but that and and
there were and there were some
limitations to that study but uh
in effect many of the things that we
showed was were consistent with what
they
had ended up reporting but we knew
from the literature that uh psilocybin
at that dose had been given
safely in in in various studies so we
we thought that there wasn't any great
value
in uh studying a range of doses nor
could we afford to do so because this
uh study was supported partly through a
a pre-existing grant but also through
significantly through philanthropic
support
so okay so people came back two months
later
and they said this and you listened
which is also extremely interesting
because it did violate
some of your presuppositions even though
you were curious about this
yeah so it just was hugely
uh unprecedented
in my experiences someone would say that
experience i had two months ago
i think about every day and it's among
the most important experiences of my
life and
you know my first thought was what kind
of life experiences
do these people have this is this is
seems absurd to me
and when you quiz them about it they
would say well
you know when my first child my
was born my whole life changed you know
i
you know i'll never forget that when my
father died you know uh that's
you know a huge life changer this is
it's it's kind of like that
and so so they're they're describing it
in a metric you know across their life
experience that actually makes
a whole lot of intuitive sense of major
existential episodes
yeah and but but it's so
different than any other psychoactive
drug i had ever
looked at so i was accustomed to
measuring acute
effects and describing those acute
effects and and and so you know if you
give
cocaine or an opiate or a
um you know or a dissociative anesthetic
uh and asked someone a week later or
much less
uh than a couple months later well what
was that like
you know they'll tell you but they're
drawing on memory you know oh yeah
you know we got drunk and we had a good
time and we laughed a lot
uh you know but um but
if you said well is is that important to
you
you know i it wouldn't be unless
unless they've learned not to drink that
much uh right
right but this has this has embedded
existential personal meaning of the of
of kind of the deepest order and so
after those interviews we put together
another set of questionnaires that we
have used
since then and that's actually raiding
these experiences with respect to your
entire
life experiences and so just
replicated across now a variety of
studies
we can show that you know it's usually
80 to 90 percent of people rate these
experiences
in the top five of their life and in
that first study
i think 30 percent rated
it as the single most spiritually
significant experience of their entire
life
uh so so it's of that order of magnitude
right
so now you went in there with this this
um
some april skepticism but you'd also be
gripped already at that point by some
intuition that
there was something in that domain of
experience that was crucially important
and so
now people came back and said well look
i've experienced that and
you know it had a huge impact on me and
so what happens next in your res
where do you take that you develop this
new questionnaire
what's the next study and why
well yes so it interfaced with my own
experience
because you know i'd been involved with
meditation i appreciated aspects of
the primary mystical experience and we
can talk about that that those are the
qualities of the
acute experience that seem to
predict these longer-term
attributions of meaning and spiritual
significance right
so you you okay so were there people who
took the psilocybin
that didn't have the mystical experience
and that didn't report the long-term
effects
or was it was everyone who was affect
was everyone affected by this psilocybin
regardless of
of that no there's some
there's some variation and some people
will not have
uh classic mystical experiences
and some people won't have classic
mythical experiences yet
will describe them as meaningful
but but overall
the those people who have these
experiences that we describe as classic
mystical experiences
are the ones that will report
uh enduring positive changes and there's
a good correlation
there changes are they reporting sorry i
also interrupted one of your points
there
yeah let's see so um
so they're reporting you know in the in
the most general terms
uh you know positive changes and
attitudes about themselves about life
uh their uh their
emotions uh uh behavioral changes
spirituality are all
are all changed in
ways that are uh uh
that are that are felt to be uh deeply
meaningful
and significant right so things are bad
so they report that their lives are
better but it's not hedonic better like
cocaine better it's not psychomotor
stimulant better
it's philosophical better and and i mean
that's why i think your findings on this
increase in trait openness are
so absolutely well they're unbelievable
first of all they're so powerful it's
just
and i have no idea in the final analysis
what to make of them but
it is really something stop me if i'm
wrong but it's
it's like a philosophical deepening and
it is better conceptualized as an
expansion of
of the experience of significant meaning
rather than
on a generalized rise in positive
emotion like you didn't get an increase
in extroversion which is the positive
emotion dimension you got an experience
in openness which is the creativity
dimension and
it's also associated with revelatory
thought right
because openness looks like the trait
that we would identify as creativity and
creative people
are generative in their ideas right
they're intuitive they have these inside
experiences that you were all
also interested in they're able to make
associations between
distant thoughts and observe patterns
and if you're high in openness you're
also interested in ideas you tend to be
philosophical in your outlook
you have a strong affinity for fiction
and narrative
all of that clumps together and your
research maybe we can go
there next is you showed that after a
single
dose mystical experience on psilocybin
people moved
the equivalent of from the 50th
percentile to the 85th
percentile in trade openness one
standard deviation
and so that's and that was permanent
okay so
so talk about that and what the hell
happened and what do you think's
happening neurologically
yeah well let me let me back up
to uh the acute experience and describe
components of that because it it that
explains
then i think how people are looking back
at these experiences
so the key features of this so-called
primary mystical experience and we
and we now have developed a very good uh
questionnaire that's psychometrically
solid
and can measure this the key features of
this
are this sense of unity this sense of
the interconnectedness
of all people and all things and that
can be experienced
both introvertedly
and that is that everything is within or
it can be experienced
extrovertedly in the in the whole you
know the literature on
mystical experiences you know outside of
drugs uh you know was was laid out in
the
in and and set forth this kind of
template
so there's a sense of the
interconnectedness of all people
all things the unity yeah the meaningful
interconnectedness right that
that somehow that's all connected not
just connected but also that the entire
pattern of connection has some
transcendent or ultimate significance
that's hidden from us
yeah let me go into the other quality so
it's that unity
that's accompanied by a sense of
sacredness or reverence
so there's something about this
experience that's felt to be deeply
precious if you don't want to use a word
that's
tinged with spiritual implications
but there's something deeply precious
about it
and then there's the noetic sense not
only is it
precious it's absolutely true
and and for most people they will
endorse
it's more real than everyday waking
consciousness
it's more real than real
and and then there there are sub factors
to the mystical experience and that's
positive mood transcendence of time and
space and ineffability one of the first
things that people say
in coming out of these experiences when
i walk into the session room and ask
them well
you know tell me about your experience
they'll they'll kind of
look down and and maybe smile or
look baffled and they say you know i
can't even put this into words
and and i'm thinking okay well that's
one of the six criteria
here so what i think is
that this sense of unity the fact that
there's
some sense that we're all in this
together
this is all interconnected there's a
wholeness
there that's precious and it's
absolutely true
and and and with that it may be that
noetic
quality that it's absolutely true might
account for why
these experiences then are sustained
they have enduring
because people believe that there's some
fundamental truth value in what they
have learned it's not
like getting drunk and saying yeah i had
i had a great time
but you don't learn anything you know
important
you know on how to conduct your life
going forward other than maybe not drink
so much
uh you know but this is something at a
at a very
uh at a very personal level and and then
i think
that that explains a lot of
of how it is that people then
[Music]
come to uh change so very often
uh uh
you know there's a level of meaning
making i mean this
right right down your your alley jordan
there's a level of meaning making that
comes out of these experiences
that end up rewriting the personal
narrative that the person has about
themselves
and about the play their place in the
world and
and that accounts for these
uh enduring changes and the fact that
people then become behaviorally much
more
flexible because if that
if that narrative structure is changed
then
the analogy i think of is you're
rewriting the underlying operating
system
and and with that everything can change
people can
change their life courses in ways that
they
were unimaginable okay so let me let me
make a couple of comments about that and
you tell me what you think about this
okay so when i've looked at
i think of the operating system as it
has
a narrative structure fundamentally and
the reason for that is that we have to
know how to behave
and narratives are about behavior and so
and narratives address the question of
how we should behave
there's a perceptual element too because
you have to perceive in order to act and
so
your perceptions are very tightly linked
to your behavioral aims
and that's quite clear from the hardcore
psychological
literature okay so my sense of
of the of the deep narrative because i
think that the world is best construed
and i do mean best construed as a place
of order and chaos
and that can be technically described
the distinction between those two and
that there's a battle between good and
evil
going on against that background now
i want to talk about the good and evil
background a bit because it pertains to
this rewriting of the narrative
so i look at stories like the story of
cain and abel which is a very ancient
story and it's clearly a story of good
against evil and
it's a it's a it's a foundational story
because it's really in the western
culture
in the narrative tradition it's the
story of the first two
genuine human beings because adam and
eve are made by god but cain and abel
are born
they're the first actual people and one
of them is a murderous
genocidal psychopath and the other is
a hero and so you see that dichotomy
there instantly and so
cane is the adversary the dark
narrative the dark force let's say and
why well
what happens to cain is that he
struggles and sacrifices like we
all do we make our sacrifices in the
present and we assume that
by doing so the benevolence of the world
will manifest it
to us that's why we're willing to forgo
gratification and to work that's all
sacrifice
and so cain sacrifices but god rejects
his sacrifice and
the story is brilliantly ambivalent
about why
and the reason that's a brilliant
ambivalence is because
you can work diligently and make the
proper sacrifices
as far as you're concerned and yet fail
which means that all that work all that
foregone gratification
that pact with god that that uh
um what is it that god has with the
israelites there's a name for that
covenant
the implicit covenant has been broken
and cain responds to that
with tremendous anger right he raises
his fist against the sky and shakes it
and says
ah this should not be and then he takes
revenge he says i will destroy
what is most valuable to you and so he
goes after abel who
is an ideal person whose sacrifices are
welcomed by god
and he kills them and then all hell
breaks loose in the aftermath of that in
kane's relatives and
like the more i just delved into that
story the more it
it it shocked me i couldn't believe that
much information could be packed into
what's essentially 12 lines
okay so now imagine that imagine that in
each of our
souls we have this competing tendency
you know we see the suffering and
the horror of our lives the
vulnerability and the mortality
of everything that we love and cherish
and and our failure
and to and that turns us against being
you talked about being at the beginning
of this that turns us against being
and and and then there's the other part
of us that
maintains faith and that strives forward
but each of us is an intermingling of
those
and so the rewrite seems to me to be
something like
the revelation that the positive end of
that
prop set of propositions is actually
true
that things are interconnected that
things are fundamentally good that love
and truth can actually prevail and that
gives some experiential
weight that can be used as a counter
position against that destructive
cynicism and
these the psychedelic the mystical
experience seems to
allow for that transformation that does
that seem
what do you think of that yeah that
that that sounds right i mean there's
something
hugely curious about the nature of these
experiences because they are they appear
to be strongly biased
toward this benevolent sense of
of of wonder yeah and that's associated
with that certainty of truth which is
not what you'd expect right because
it's not that easy to make a powerful
credible case for
benevolence and truth we're not even
wired that way
because we overestimate like we over
experience the magnitude of negative
of negative uh experiences we're more
sensitive to them so it's surprising
that that that would emerge
it's unlikely yeah and well but isn't it
interesting i mean you know the fact is
you know that these experiences that
occur
with the psychedelics are you know are
very much part of naturally occurring
experiences
of this type so there you know there can
be conversion experiences or religious
experiences that come out in you know
under various conditions either
spontaneously or in prayer practice
uh you know in breath work
so i mean to me uh you know i conclude
that we're
we're we're wired to have these kinds of
experiences
what yeah so that in itself is an
absolute radical claim you know i mean
i've gone after some of
the darwinians that i've the atheistic
darwinians that i've talked to for
failing to take into account
what i regard as the
the preponderance of scientific evidence
indicating that the religious
instinct is real and that it's
biologically grounded it's like okay
it's real it's biologically grounded
what do you have to say about that from
an evolutionary perspective then is that
is that a spandrel it's like no because
it looks like it's central to the
development of human culture itself
not only is it not a spend rule it's
like the opposite of the spandrel
and so what what are we supposed to
conclude if we conclude that the
religious instinct has
actually evolved it's deeply biological
and it speaks of like a benevolent and
truth-oriented teleological reality
that is not the way our culture is
constructed
well i was this was the question i was
was
kind of posed to you what what's going
on here i it's
now well that's exactly what we're
trying to figure out isn't it just what
the hell is going on here
yeah what the hell is going on and
and and and just to reflect it back on
was it a good decision to follow this i
mean
what's more important than this jordan
what's more important than
finding out what's going on here no i
can't believe like i actually
can't believe how important this is you
know i mean i've been studying the
psychedelic literature for 20 years and
and in as deep a manner as i can
possibly manage and every time i think i
have some grasp on how important it is i
learned something else and i think oh
it's way more important than i thought
it was it's it's of crucial significance
uh it's it's it's it's of central it's
literally of central significance it's
literally of central significance
and so now it needs to it and you know
partly why i was so
interested in talking to you is i'm
trying to figure out it's like okay well
what happens if we take this seriously
like if we start to actually take this
seriously with
dead seriousness what what's the
consequence of that
you know and so all right so so let's
look at the
let's look at the fear of death that's
the place i want to go next and
there's a couple of things i'm
interested in about that the first is
that
there so you have this study showing
that cancer
sufferers take psilocybin and they show
a marked reduction in the fear of death
and
and that gets stranger the more deeply
you investigate it and that there's
these ancient
lucinian mysteries that seem to be
associated with something like the
experience of a voyage
to the land of the dead an encounter
with ancestral spirits
a religious transformation and then and
then
the the the the eradication or at least
the the
diminution of of the fear of death but
all of that
mythological baggage so to speak went
along with the experience so there's
there's a a journey of some sort to a
place of some sort
that seems to have commonality across
different event individuals strangely
enough
that results in this pronounced
transformation of the existential
consideration of mortality itself
so it's again
of sufficient significance so that
there's no end to how deeply you can
investigate it so
tell me about that experiment and what
you saw happening and what you've made
of it
so these were cancer patients
who met diagnostic criteria for
significant anxiety or depression
secondary to their cancer diagnosis
and you know as you as you well know and
can appreciate when someone's
facing a life-threatening illness
that can be hugely uh disruptive
to them uh so that the study was
a simple study it was blinded
and done very rigorously but
people ended up getting a high dose of
psilocybin at some point
and after doing so their
depression anxiety drops just
precipitously
it remains completely low
out to the six-month point and another
group that ran a parallel kind of study
did a follow-up five years and
it's and they're still reporting those
kinds of effects so these are the
those kind of enduring uh changes so
you know what's going on there um well
it it's it's a it's a mixture part of it
is uh a different attitude about
death and dying and we're actually
analyzing data from a huge survey
right now on changed attitudes about
death and dying
secondary to psychedelic exposure
and comparing that to the kinds of
changes that people have
uh that that that occur
naturalistically such as near-death
experiences where you get
that same kind of uh shift
uh so that's that's certainly an
element but that you know but there's
also
um related to that is this
sense of benevolent unity that there's
something about this
mystery that we find ourselves in so
like
something cropped up let me tell you
about it and tell so i've
when i've
so our life is dependent on death
because our cells are constantly dying
and if death isn't regulated properly
within us we get cancer
for example so the the fact of our
healthy existence is
actually paradoxically dependent on
death itself
the proper amount of death keeps us
healthy
and you know it's so interesting because
that's also true psychologically
is that you have to let old concepts die
and and they don't like to die it's it's
a painful experience to have the old you
die
in in the light of new experience it's
painful enough so that people will
resist it
but there's a there's this benevolent
death that's a reparative mechanism
and when when i've allowed my intuitions
to extend themselves as far as possible
i think well that's
that's true of of of being itself is
that
in the manner that we can't comprehend
death plays
a restorative role it's it's
it's something like the precursor to
resurrection
and god only knows where that idea goes
but but
and i believe that these mystical
experiences provide a window into that
that there's this mechanism of death at
work but it's a reparative and
and creative mechanism all things
considered it's building towards
something that we
that we have that we have an intuition
of and want to participate in and
and are tortured by our conscience for
not participating in
and and a glimpse of that
a glimpse of that
it at least shows you that there's more
going on than you think
that there's more going on than you want
so so much of hopelessness is a
consequence of
prematurely if premature closure
i am certain this is hopeless and
pointless
well that mystical experience can
dispense with that certainty i'm not so
sure
that i know what's going on i'm not so
inclined to
to be uh what uh
to be to not have doubt about my own
skepticism
so all right so back to the to the study
let me just let me just pick up on that
because one of the
questions that i found myself asking
people as they enrolled
in the study is you know so you know
what do you what do you think happens
when when
you die and it
it's a very interesting question to ask
ask people
and you know it and they're those who
say
uh it's it's lights out it's unplugged
that
you know and that's it
after these kinds of experiences there's
a
crack in that doorway there's less
certainty
about about that and that's and that is
part of this
uh part of the kinds of changes
that come about uh with these
uh experiences uh there's
you know a shift in in world view
uh a shift in the a sense of the nature
of consciousness
maybe having an eternal quality to it
and that can be tinged with spirituality
if someone
uh interprets it within a in a religious
framework there's something enduring
about that and so the certainty
that everything ends at the moment of
death
is uh it comes into
more significant uh question
very often with these kinds of
experiences but i don't think it
accounts for
everything uh and there there are people
who
come out of these experiences still
saying well yeah i don't
i don't believe in uh you know and
any kind of afterlife or anything
existing
you know but there is a sense that they
may have
of the elegance and the beauty and the
benevolence of the entire
process that just
makes them feel filled with gratitude
for the opportunity to be a sentient
being and have this experience there's
something celebratory about gratitude
why that emotion in particular did you
focus on
i i think that's actually i
i think that's the core to to what
uh very often well at least what i
uh believe comes out of these uh
experiences there's a sense of wonder
that comes out
of the of the mystery of what it is that
we don't know i mean
you know there is this hard problem of
consciousness but most people don't
contemplate it very
very seriously uh with a psychedelic
it's it's almost impossible not to be
astonished by how much
and humbled by how much you don't
understand
about the nature of your own mind and
the nature of reality
and and so we're confronted with this
mystery of what is this about
how is it you know that we're these
highly evolved
beings you know who that have developed
the capacity to
sense things to walk to talk with
developed societies
we've developed you know science as a
methodology we can communicate
and on top of all that
the astonishing fact is that we're aware
that we're aware that if we
and that wouldn't have to be the case
and that's the hard problem of
consciousness
and well i think there's even a harder
problem which which the mystical
experiences seem to shed some light on
which is
to what degree is being itself dependent
on consciousness
because there is the problem of
consciousness but there's the problem of
being what does it mean that things are
well it seems to mean
or at least you can make the case that
well things aren't
unless they're experienced because what
sort of being is there in the absence of
any experience whatsoever it's it's all
there is
is all you can do is construct the
hypothetical
picture of what being would be like in
the absence of consciousness
as a conscious creature would formulate
that that's the best you can do
but that's still dependent on
consciousness and so there's a real
mystery there which is what
you know i don't think it's a mystery
that's properly addressed by
i mean i'm an evolutionary biologist for
all intents and purposes
in my in my orientation but
a reductive materialism doesn't address
that problem and there's many other
problems it doesn't address as well and
it doesn't address them if you take them
seriously
it's like there is some relationship
between consciousness and being
and and i don't see how that can it's
that's not easily explained by making
consciousness an epiphenomenon of matter
that just makes matter more mysterious
as far as i'm concerned it doesn't get
rid of the problem
but there therein comes the gratitude
right the very
the the very fact that we are
are gifted with this experience of
experience well i ended my last book
with with
with a chapter be grateful in spite of
your suffering
and that was the end of a two-book cycle
of thinking and
i put it at the end as the culmination
like
what's a final moral rule well that's it
because that's the ant that's the
antidote to kane
you know and and i take kane's argument
seriously it's a serious argument are
things so terrible that they shouldn't
exist at all well
you know you can accrue a fair bit of
evidence in favor of that hypothesis
it doesn't lead to the right place it
makes everything worse as far as i can
tell and i haven't encountered a
situation
personally where gratitude
wasn't better than its alternative and
the alternative seems unbelievably
destructive resentment i think is the
opposite of gratitude and
resentment can be a salutary emotion in
that if you notice its emergence in your
life it signifies something that you
should pay attention to
but i have seen nothing about it that's
positive as something to be cultivated
you certainly don't teach your children
to be you know if you sit down and have
a discussion with your wife about what
sort of children you want you never say
resentful everybody agrees that that's
toxic
beyond tolerability and so we know
there's something wrong with it
and it is extraordinarily well i think
it's extraordinarily interesting that
you focus on that particular
experience and and i think and that's
humbling as well that gratitude oh it's
hugely humbling i mean
yeah i mean the thing i mean the first
experience
you're looking into the existential
mystery right of
of being and and
and it's a it's a mind-boggling
proposition
that an initially is uh
uh is unfathomable um
and and then and then from that uh
emerges this
gratitude for that opportunity and
and if we want to circle back to the the
cancer patients
it's that gratitude you know
for the opportunity to live whether or
not they
they they believe that something occurs
after death there's a there's a
celebration
of life and and uh
very often a joy it's it's really quite
remarkable to see how people who have
been so
transformed how they interact with
uh family members who are you know
turn out at that point to be more
distraught than they are
very often and so how do what sort of
transformations do you see in their
actions with their family members
oh they're reassuring i mean they'll say
you know
there's a realism to the seriousness of
their
condition uh so you know they'll say
this is
this is very sad i'm dying i'm gonna
leave
but it's okay uh
it's it's it's okay everything is all
right
yeah so so the transformation is so
radical that not only
do they suffer less with regards to
their own mortality
but they're transformed sufficiently so
that they can now attend to others
despite the fact that they are the
people that have the fatal illness
yeah that they become the caretakers in
the in the family unit
and it also has the potential for
totally shifting end-of-life care
because if you're not if you're no
longer grasping
to every shred of every minute of life
you know there's a
a deep interest in connecting and
staying connected and so you're much
less likely to
elect to go in the hospital and uh
and and under uh
incredibly uh brutal conditions uh
you know to achieve those last
days or weeks um so
so it the potential actually in terms of
large kind of cultural change
to change death and dying and how we
handle that as a culture
is is very significant
why psilocybin why did you pick
psilocybin
uh well a couple couple reasons
one its duration of action is clinically
manageable
so it's not too short if you if you
if you did intravenous dmt
that's a matter of 15 or 20 minutes
and this gives you a longer period of
time
to have an experience and then to
reintegrate that experience
but it's not nearly as long as something
like lsd
uh which is like a 12-hour time
course which is just taxing for
everybody and
and pretty clinically unmanageable
uh there's uh
there's a sense but but i don't think we
have good data on this
that um that psilocybin
can be gentler than lsd uh
psychologically i and i'm i'm not
positive about that
but you know the most important piece of
it is that
um most people can't spell psilocybin
and it and it simply didn't have uh
the cultural baggage that lsd did
uh so uh and i think it it turns out to
be a really good
pick for a model system but
there are literally thousands of other
compounds that could be synthesized that
are going to
have a different influence on the nature
of consciousness that
should be and will be explored over time
i've been reading this book recently the
immortality key
by brian mararescu and he's making a
case that has been made
up by other people although he makes it
in a very interesting way in a very
original way
it's reminiscent to me of john allegro's
work from the early
late 60s late 60s which sort of got
pilloried at the time because
well that was just when lsd and all the
psychedelics were being made illegal and
allegro was sort of dumped jumped lumped
in with the hippie types and
ignored i read the sacred mushroom and
the cross
years ago and i thought he's a linguist
and he
claims to have gathered an immense
amount of
linguistic data suggesting that early
christianity
was a mushroom cult and i couldn't
assess his claims because i'm not a
linguist but it certainly looked to me
at the time like it was an
extraordinarily serious book and i read
it and i thought
i have no idea what to do with this
information
i i can't tell if it's credible or not
and if it is credible
well well then what like what in the
world are we supposed to do with this
and then
rescue he's making a strong case that
the elusionian mysteries were which
upon in which the greek greek society
that gave rise to the west let's say was
embedded was
deeply embedded within a psychedelic
religious tradition that was actually
an integral part of the culture not some
peripheral element but a central element
that that was also the case with the
cult of dionysius
the god of the wine and that
christianity took many of the mysteries
including the sacrament from the
dionysian cult
and so i think and i certainly think
that the book of revelation bears
all the hallmarks of a classic
psychedelic experience
um so then i'm thinking
well what are you supposed to think
about that exactly i mean i take the
fact that our society is judeo-christian
and it's underlying narrative
structure extremely seriously i i think
that's true as a fact whether it's
the right way for things to be is a
different question but
but oh and also an important question
but
i have no idea how to conceptualize
our relationship with psychedelics let
me let me tell you my most paranoid
thought about this okay
you tell me what you think about this
yeah so on the one hand you have this
the most extreme idea on the one hand is
that
psychedelic experience is a gateway to
something that's actually divine
and and god only knows what the
significance of that is but
but here's another thought um
there's this you know that parasites can
hijack nervous systems
so there's this one example of of a i
may not get this story exactly right but
there's this
parasite that hijacks ants nervous
systems and
the insects it makes them climb up a
like a stalk and
they pincer themselves to a leaf and
then their body fills up with the
parasite spores and they explode and the
parasites go everywhere and
so the parasite has evolved to hijack
the ants nervous system
and there's plenty of examples of
parasites doing that sort of complex
thing over time
there's a cat a parasite that lives in
cats that makes rats more
less fearful and they're more likely to
be caught by cats which is quite
interesting and so then i'm thinking
about psilocybin and it's this mushroom
and
it produces this chemical and nobody
really knows what good the chemical is
to the mushroom and it has this immense
effect on us and
like have we been using psilocybin for
500 000 years and have we been
distributing its spores everywhere and
is it a parasite that's hijacked our
nervous system and the way it's done
that is by
producing this religious experience that
we value i mean that's the most
devastating materialistic critique of
this psychedelic idea that i've been
able to formulate and
i mean one piece of counter evidence to
that i think is the fact that
i think the evidence seems to suggest
that the
the psychedelic experience is salutary
from the perspective of mental and
physical health
rather than destructive but
it looks like we've been using mushrooms
for god only knows how long i mean it's
certainly tens of thousands of years
it's certainly at least as far back as
the last ice age
and god only knows how far back it is
before that as what
as a biological thinker say
what what d what are your thoughts about
that
[Laughter]
yeah yeah i don't know if i can
take that uh take that on
i i don't i don't understand i mean it's
a
yeah it's a huge mystery uh
and yeah what yeah and what role
do these experiences play in the
evolution of culture so
you know let's start with that one
well and so yeah what roles do religions
play in the evolution
of culture and you know a really
important and central role right
uh yeah well that central role like it
looks to me like
integrated cultures there's no
distinction between their ritual and
their dance
and their music and their stories and
their religion
that's all one thing it's and it's it's
the central source of meaning
that enables them to live as individuals
and that unites them as a people
so that that seems clear so you can't
just push the religious idea off to the
side
that that's a mistake and i think the
data for that are in
and so it's central well now it seems
shaped by these psychedelic experiences
so
what the hell are we supposed to make of
that i
i don't even know how to what to make of
that
either epistemologically you know as a
theory of knowledge or
ontologically i don't know what that
says about the structure of reality
itself
[Laughter]
well let's see it it provides an
evolutionary explanation for why
uh yeah
why that might have been conserved right
that there's there's something super
adaptive
about the religious experience in terms
of evolution of culture and or
an organization of culture well i think
look when i've tried to reduce this
i mean that experience of awe so we went
to a co we went to a whole conference on
that so
if you see someone that you really
admire
that shades into awe and you can see
that in
in the effect that celebrities have on
the on the public it's a peril
it can be paralyzing so the admiration
there's a continuum between admiration
and awe and then
you can easily make the case i think
that
admiration is the felt sense of the
instinct to
imitate so you see children maybe
they'll hear or worship someone
and then they they'll imitate them
they'll copy them they find someone
who's in that zone of proximal
development
and they start to copy them or they'll
take on the
identity of a hero or heroine in a movie
my little granddaughter who's three for
a year now
literally a year she has two names
scarlett and
and and ellie elizabeth and we kind of
call her one or the other
and if you ask her is she scarlet she'll
say yes
is she ellie yes is she pocahontas
yes is she scarlet
ellie or pocahontas pocahontas
one year now she watched that disney
movie over and over and she has a
pocahontas doll
but and but she's picked that figure and
that's
quasi-mythological figure obviously not
a historical figure
she's picked that as her identity
and i see that as we can we can imitate
people we talked about and hyper reality
before
well you can find someone you admire and
they're real
or you can find someone who's a
mythological figure and they're hyper
real
and the hyper reality is so adaptive
that imitating the hyper reel is more
adaptive than imitating
the real and that's to me the that's the
essence of the religious instinct it's
to derive the hyper real and then to
imitate that
and i think that's what worship means
essentially
all with everything stripped away and so
that's a profound instinct
because human beings are unbelievable
mimics i mean that
that's a very underappreciated element
of our cognitive architecture
a fundamental element and
that that instinct to admire and
experience off facilitates that mimicry
and that
increases the probability of the
manifestation of complex adaptive
behavior
okay so and then what does what
that makes of the religious domain
something real as far as i'm concerned
even real from the biological sense
but that deepens the mystery of the
involvement of the psychedelics in that
like are they are they parasitizing that
are they like cocaine
hyper stimulates the psychomotor
stimulant system
well does psychedelics hyper stimulate
the
imitation aw system and and is that an
illusion or is it
in fact a revelation of something deeper
yet yeah just circle back to the
ontological
question so just recently i listened to
a
lecture that francis collins gave now so
francis collins you may recognize
is director of the national institutes
on health
and he was also the director of the
human
uh genome project you know so
so he's as strongly credentialed
a scientist as one can have
and yet he's uh uh
absolutely confirmed christian uh
and so he was giving a lecture on
the reconciliation of i think he called
it harmonization of a scientific
and religious worldview uh but he was
he was laying out his arguments for the
existence
of of god and
one of them is what it
would be his claim and it's an
interesting claim and you could argue it
but the existence of moral law that
there is an absolute
moral law look you know you i looked at
jack pancep's work you know and he shows
that you see complex morality emerging
rats in play play iterated play which is
a crucial issue right
what pattern of behavior is sustainably
optimal across
repeated social interactions well you
know
you hear all these post-modern critiques
say of more of
of hierarchical structure because of its
its predication on
power i think no no corrupt hierarchies
are predicated on power
functional hierarchies are predicated on
reciprocal
uh on reciprocity on productive
reciprocity
you know i was talking to this this
joker willink who was the commander of
fallujah in in
in in in the 20 years ago and he's a
real warrior type you know
like a real intimidating person
physically and mentally for that matter
um he talked about his navy seal
training and
you know he said well we were taught it
was pounded into us to have
the back of the guy next to us it wasn't
like every powerful
clambering ape for himself not at all
in these intensely competitive
hierarchies which
would be you'd think as pure a
manifestation of the power motive as
would be possible power is not the
guiding ethos
and he said quite clearly no your men
won't attend to you unless it's
reciprocal
you they have to know you have their
backs
and he and so and he made also a very
sophisticated case for
the development of verbal intelligence
and the ability to communicate in
strategizing and also in
taking care of your team and so i don't
believe that um
so what am i getting at in relationship
to your to your last point
this this religious this emergent ethic
this natural law okay so imagine now
hierarchies are organized around an
ethical principle if they're to be
stable and productive across long spans
of time
and a pattern that pattern emerges
across culturally it's reciprocal
productivity it's something like that
it's more there's more to it than that
okay now you're selected for your
success in those hierarchies based on
your ability to manifest that pattern
because that'll push you up the
hierarchy that increases as far as i can
tell that increases your
attractiveness as a potential mate
substantially
and so i think you can make a very deep
biological case for the
even for the emergent evolution of an
ethical sense and and i think that does
speak to people in the
voice of their conscience and that that
is part of
but then you think well if that's part
of existence how deep a part is it
how built in is it you know and i i
don't
i and that i suppose depends to some
degree on how crucial consciousness is
to being
okay so back to back to the gentleman
that you were discussing
he was talking about a natural ethic
yeah
uh well i think
as as a pointer to god something
absolute about the nature of
what moral law is and from that
standpoint
uh if if you're willing to go that route
then maybe these experiences are
actually pointing to
something that is absolute and true
and informative do you think that's true
i'm a scientist it's fine to be
investigating it you know what yeah
no i'm going to pin you down no let's
see
you know my i'm trained as a scientist
my default is
uh to be deeply curious
and to be deeply skeptical so right
which is the right
right attitude towards yeah and so my my
response always is that i believe in the
data
and so and so that remains an open
question
but it's certainly fun to toy with as uh
uh as an all as an alternative framing
of what's going on
i mean we're in the middle of this huge
huge mystery
so
historical significance what do you
think of the theories associating
early christianity and the sacrament
with with the
with the ingestion of psychedelic
substances
i don't i don't know certainly it's
quite
plausible i mean the very the if you if
you read the accounts of the
uh illusion mysteries uh and
and the kinds of experiences people had
it sure sounds like a psychedelic
experience at least
some of those accounts but we also know
that those kinds of experiences can be
engendered naturally as well
uh and so i yeah i
i don't want to discount that you know
that is a
a possibility there's actually some
you know some the the psychedelic
proponents the enthusiasts
you know think that what we're laying
down is
the you know the future this is the most
valuable tool there
is you know to open up to these
kind of experiences and i see it
actually quite
differently is is you know we're
learning about the capacity of the
of the human species of the organism to
have these experiences
and what i would suspect is that in
you know 10 20 50 years
uh psychedelics are going to be very
considered very crude tools
to engender these things we're going to
have you know much
better ways and more precise ways to
intervene in in this process
to occasion experiences of of this
uh of this sort but to go back to your
question so what
yeah is this plausible that it has
played a role
uh it's certainly plausible
it seems quite unlikely that it accounts
for
you the entirety of uh
of these kinds of transformations it
still leaves all sorts of things
unsolved like
i mean why did the worship of dionysius
transform into the worship of christ for
example i mean we
even if there's psychedelic con
continuity there
that that's a question that we can
hardly pose let alone answer and
it it i'm also extremely curious
i mean this place do you think it's
reasonable to
conceptualize
the the destination place of a trip
as a place i mean that's what myth
that's what greek mythology appears to
do that's what the mythology of the
underworld appears to be about as far as
i can tell
what what do you think about
we've talked about how psychedelics shed
a different light on
the structure of reality as we perceive
it but people also report
going places that aren't here exactly
they're el and that the idea the
shamanic idea that the
the universe is a tree i i believe that
that's
the tree of of of size essentially that
that's the realm from the subatomic to
the cosmic that's how that's portrayed
in the
in the primordial human imagination and
the shaman report traveling up and down
those levels and
that's not out of keeping with the
experiences that people report on
psychedelics unsurprisingly because
hypothetically they're derived from the
same
domain and then there's the entity
problem as well especially with dmt i
know rick strassman who studied dmt so
intently and
i have never met rick but my impression
from reading him is that he was a pretty
button-down sort of guy
when he got into the psychedelic field
he he wasn't driven in there
from the hippy end of things it was more
from the you know
skeptical intellect type or direction
but
he he appears to have been so shocked by
what the dmt
experience produced in terms of reports
from people that
you know it well it was shocking to him
to say the least and no wonder because
it seems that everyone who takes dmt
reports going somewhere very fast
and encountering all sorts of alien
entities
and but they also describe that as hyper
real and if you object that those are
figures of the imagination or even union
archetypes among those who would
know of that sort of thing that that's
not an acceptable
explanation appear apparently
so what do you make of that yeah and
well this
story with rick straussman is
interesting because it it was
literally so disquieting to him that he
ended up
stopping his research because he had
such a
uh a high rate of his participants
uh you know talking about encountering
uh entities within that that he
uh
he didn't know how to manage that so one
of the
surveys but who does
right because it's it's just what do you
do with it what do you do with data like
you know
you said you go where the data drives
you and fair enough but sometimes the
data itself is
you don't know what to do with it and
and the dmt experiences certainly seem
to fall in that category
yeah so so we've run a number of
interesting survey studies and you
mentioned them at the
outset one about god encounter
experiences
and the other about entity encounters
with uh
with dmt and uh
and and we did it this is a survey study
we
we actually ended up getting data
on 2500 people who had had a dmt
entity encounter experience and and we
gave them
detailed uh questionnaires about the
nature of those experiences
most of them ended up feeling that they
had encountered
a sentient and and very
in a conscious benevolent
often sacred other in these
experiences which was surprising to us
because we
based on the literature i had thought
that these
and in the encounter experiences might
be something
different than that but importantly most
of the people claim to
come out of the experience with a with a
different
sense of of reality uh they can
they uh the majority of them continue
to think that the entity
existed after the experience continues
to exist
so what so they're not mere figments of
the imagination
no absolutely not their yeah their
conception of reality has been
shifted in a in a really fundamental and
primary way
and so that's that's that's haunting now
one of the curiosities is that in a
different survey when we asked people
about god encounter experiences and we
did that
naturally occurring god encounters and
psychedelic occasion god encounters
it actually was much of the same story
people felt that they were in the
presence of a
conscious intelligent benevolent
entity caring entity and their worldview
shifted but these were people who went
into this framing it in terms of a
spiritual religious
experience the dmt people
you know very often didn't have a
religious orientation to begin with
you know yet they come out with these
beliefs
it's um and we should point out to
everyone who's listening that dmt is the
active ingredient in the brazilian
in the amazonian ayahuasca which is also
a complete mystery in and of itself
because nobody can figure out how those
shaman figured out how to make that
stuff
so yeah uh and
with in the ayahuasca dmt is
ingested along with a compound that
that slows its elimination so it changes
the entire
time course and in my sense although
entity encounters can occur
with psychedelics generally my
impression is that the intensity of
these kinds of entity encounter
experiences and the probability
are much greater with this is smoked dmt
uh or in the case of rick straussman it
was intravenous dmt but
it's a very fast onset right well and
that's pharmacologically relevant
because one of the
one of the determinants of the effect of
a drug is
maximum blood level say or brain level
but another is the rate at which that
level is attained
so which is why injected cocaine is so
much more potent
and also dangerous than than say orally
administered cocaine
same with most drugs so that rapidity of
onset is relevant
so i mean do you have any
ontological sense of what's happening in
the dmt experience
well before i do before we go to the on
logical sense
the dmt experience maps
onto naturally occurring entity
encounter experiences so you know we
have a whole history of
of people reporting
alien encounter experiences or alien
abduction
experiences and right and if you really
look at that
those descriptions they're much more
similar than different
to what we're seeing with the the dmt
so i i would come yes which makes things
even weirder i would say
well weirder and and maybe not
the in the same sense that we're
biologically
wired or predisposed to have these
kinds of experiences but then
ontologically
what what do you what do you make of
make of them
and you know when you know certainly
when i had
read alien encounter literature i
you know just a priori i was
entirely dismissive of it who was that
was mac
right at harvard a very well
credentialed psychiatrist he was
he had his tail put in a complete knot
by his investigations of
the alien encounters because what he
showed was that
he figured that people who were
reporting this would have an extensive
history of psychopathology of one form
or another but when he did the analysis
there was no evidence for that
and so mac ended up believing that that
well that something real had happened to
these people and of course that did his
career no favor
and but which is also i would say an
indication of how strongly he came to
believe
that yeah and and there have been other
other
studies uh done uh
uh since then so i you know i think
we're
we're talking about the same kind of
process now you know what's going
on and what does it mean why that
i don't know i mean it sure seems un
unlikely apriori well i
i don't know i don't know what to make
of it one of the striking features of
the dmt encounters
was that the attributions made to the
entity really mapped on to the same
kinds of attributions that people
described in their god encounter
experiences so those are more similar
than
uh than different now if you if you read
that dmt literature you get
you know other wild descriptions of you
know alligators and
insectoids and mechanical clowns and
yeah yeah it's really it it
it just makes things weirder the more
you read about the experiences
it is but you know having 2500
cases you know we were looking at is is
there a modal description you know are
these going to look like the
alien grays or something like that well
no not at all
it's just a smear of um
you know of uh descriptors
uh of of what they think they
uh encountered and and you know and i
you know what i wonder with the god
encounters i mean if that's not the same
kind of mechanism at work and
uh and maybe there's less visualization
maybe it's less likely that there's
going to be a
um you know uh
um you know a sense of
uh encountering an embodied other
uh but there's something ineffable more
ineffable about
uh some of those experiences uh
okay so i'm gonna i'm gonna pull us in
another direction because there's
definitely
there's other things i really want to
get your opinion about um
many things let's start with
your studies in religious leaders like
what are you doing
what what motivated you to do that why
yeah i really want to know why you're
doing that what you think will happen
what the cultural significance is such a
wild thing to do
like you've got you've already
established the fact that these mystical
experiences are
reliably inducible and now you're
pulling in
figures of of significance in religious
communities
so it's another thing i can't believe
you've managed to do but
why and and what are you seeing and and
what do you think is going to happen
well let's see so i'm a little bit
handicapped in how much i can say about
that specific study but let me describe
that line of investigation
so that came it you know it just comes
out
of my own deep curiosity about the
nature of these experience and their
uh and their spiritual religious
significance so we started out with
healthy volunteers and we've done a
whole bunch of stuff with
patient populations so you know the
where the rubber meets the road here and
our culture
immediately is these drugs as
therapeutics and they're going to be
very powerful yes because you've had
amazing success with smoking cessation
for example smoking and depression
and end of life uh and there's good
evidence for alcoholism and and there
are variety of
other targets now and that an excitement
is that we may have trans diagnostic
efficacy because the very nature of
these
experiences are so fundamental to
rewriting the operating system if you
will
that the kinds of changes that can come
about can cut across a variety of
psychiatric
diagnostic categories but so there
that that work is going on so a
psychiatric drug that's not hampered by
diagnostic
diversity essentially yeah i mean it's
not going to work with everything
obviously but
uh you know but i think its application
is going to be much broader than any
psychiatric
well and as you already pointed out
we're not very good at this yet
like right we've been investigating this
for how long
well 20 years now right right so you
know
all things considered a drop in the
bucket yeah
um so this other line of investigation
uh you know grew out of my interest in
meditation so we started with healthy
volunteers
we then we did some just parametric
work just uh figuring out dose effects
and replicability and stuff like that
and then we went on and we did a study
in beginning meditators
people who were interested in taking on
a meditation practice
and who were uh psychedelic naive and
what we showed
is again the mystical experience
drives long long term trait level
changes of the type that you mentioned
in terms of openness but there's a
number of other trait level changes that
occur very often in a pro-social
direction you know gratitude and
altruism
and that sort of thing we then did a
study in long-term
meditators and of course that came right
out of my interest so the question there
was
well what about people who have spent
decades
exploring the nature of their mind and
and have developed some capacity for
sustained uh investigation of that sort
what do they make of these experiences
uh and that study we're writing up but i
can
i can say that um
most of those long-term meditators found
those experiences to be
astonishing just as everyone else has
so that's very crucial right because
they've they're all they're initiates
already in some sense but
this is pushing them past where they've
already gone and radically
yeah and they've and they attribute
positive changes to their sitting
meditation practice
and to their uh sense of of
uh awareness in daily life which is
really the core of what meditation
practices
is cultivating so all the same kinds of
positive attributions
and and saying that it's facilitates
their engagement
none of them would say that it's a
psychedelics or a substitute for what
the the meditation practice because
meditation results in the stability of
of awareness that psychedelics certainly
do not so then the next
step was
religious professionals and we are
uh collecting the last data on that it
was a study that was run
jointly at hopkins and nyu
and we've made a pact in the study team
not to
talk about any results until we're ready
to
uh publish but but i can tell you i can
give you a broad brush
stroke of what we're thinking there uh
of course and
and hoping perhaps maybe because we we
maybe we can close this off with a
little bit of discussion about
you know the potential impact of this
i mean i'm very interested for example
in the decline of religious
belief across the west and there's a
there's a necessity for revitalization
and
and well back to back to the religious
leaders
yeah so that's the question what so
among people who have made career
commitments
to uh to ministry
and and and to supporting
people's spiritual growth what what
happens
with them with a with a psychedelic
experience and and how does that fit
with
their ministry uh their engagement in
that
and uh and their bleep do you plan to do
long-term
efficacy studies like i'd be really
curious if your
your psychedelic enhanced ministers
let's say
were then more credible proponents for
their
community and their congregations were
disproportionately for example
or perhaps not likely to grow
we probably don't have the power to uh
address that question
we'll certainly follow these people up
and the initial study we have follow up
to
uh 12 months and and uh and we're doing
a lot of qualitative
uh work on this um
i think i think what i can say without
without saying anything specific about
the data is
uh uh that the results
are not inconsistent with that that we
have seen
in healthy volunteers and beginning
meditators and long-term meditators
uh that that is there's something
astonishing about these
experiences and i'll i'll have to uh
leave it at that but but i think the
implications
are are are important i mean so the
question is
yeah how does this uh interact
with faith uh traditions and
um and that that's going to be an
interesting story to tell
and and to have unfold but i don't think
i can say anything further about it
yeah well yeah fair enough fair enough
um i guess i'm i'm sorry i can
backing off the study per se i mean you
know
there's something about these
experiences that speak
to the ineffable uh
and uh and and this whole
project of organizing community around
um around investigation
and cultivation of of the
um fruits of those kinds of
experiences and i think that's hugely
consequential so one of the one of the
features of the
you know that i've already discussed of
the primary mystical experience
is this sense of the interconnectedness
of all people and it's sacred
and it's true and and and
from that arises this sense of a
pro-social sense of altruism
a sense that we're all in this together
well if that isn't the golden rule and
if that doesn't
you know speak to the nature of
you know most ethical and moral
traditions
okay so i want to unpack that for a
minute because it's so surprising like
you can go over that quickly and it
doesn't sound surprising it's
so the drugs are producing an expansion
of human experience that's meaningful
and positive but it's not
hedonic precisely it that isn't the
system it's affecting
so that's unbelievably crucial it's
something other than
cocaine it's something other than
incentive reward okay so now it's
lasting and it's it's and then there's
the pro-social element
and the and the uniting elements so it's
philosophical
but it's also ethical and all of those
things are radical surprises right
it could be philosophical without being
ethical
and and it could be positive without
being
philosophical and then the the fourth
thing is is the
that that feeling of truth that is
associated with it too so it's got this
deep cognitive element that's also
surprising
these are these aren't things that you
would suspect or predict
there and they do differentiate these
drugs substantially from other drugs of
abuse
completely qualitatively and so
people come out they're more pro-social
and so you think that's a that's a
exaggeration or a strengthening of
of our of our inbuilt reciprocal
ethic like the so you see
you see an expansion of the
philosophical with the radical increase
in openness and and hypothetically
associated neural
transformations well now you see a on
a strengthening of that ethic
that's associated with this profound
underlying narrative readjustment
it tilts people to the positive it tilts
them to the
reciprocal and the interactive it gives
them a deeper faith
it's hard to see how all that couldn't
be of significance to religious
communities
and then the question is well what
should be what do you
talk how do you talk to religious people
about this especially if they're more on
the conservative
end of things because a less
conservative
hypothesis could hardly be imagined
right it's the psychedelic origin of the
deep judeo-christian ethic
that's that's a radical idea and
it it brings up this question well we
lost this technology
essentially something like 2 000 years
ago in the west
except in underground places do we
reincorporate it
how do we reincorporate it and what does
that mean on the religious front
like the conservative religious front
with regards to say practice
well but again i would say it doesn't
have to be
psychedelics we're gonna we're gonna
learn more about the nature
of these experiences and who knows i
mean there may be a way to do this with
uh
you know electro uh cranial stimulation
you know or or you know other kinds of
of manipulations i'm going to object to
that just for a second well
and i have a specific reason you know
because i i think that's
uh uh a careful argument and an
appropriate one but i don't think your
data support it
because you just told me that even the
experienced meditators
for them it's a qualitative
transformation and so you think
i'm and so you you've already got a
population that have been using
disciplined technology right and good
and good for them
you know eliade believed that
the shamanic transformation in its pure
form
wasn't drug mediated but i think it
looks to me like i
have great respect for iliad i learned a
tremendous amount from him
i think i don't think the evidence
supports that claim
i think the psychedelics are doing
something that is in addition to
what discipline practice i mean who
knows what happens if you practice for
35 years let's say and that's all you do
but but i'm it isn't obvious to me that
this can be duplicated
on the non-chemical front oh let's see
i i don't disagree agree with you i mean
this is the most powerful intervention
we have
for uh for creating at high probability
these kinds of
ex experiences we don't nothing comes
close
to it well there's an intensity issue
too right it's not just
probability but also intensity yeah no
absolutely but that doesn't mean that
we're not going to refine this
further and that there might not be
another way to do it
right it also doesn't mean that
disciplined practice is not advisable
and that caution isn't the appropriate
byword
yeah yeah but there you know there could
be other
physiological interventions you know
that aren't
aren't psychedelic uh drugs aren't you
know serotonin 2a
uh agonists so all i'm all i'm
scoping out is that this is going to
continue to unfold
uh scientifically just but to
to get back to the the implications so
so these experiences are
hugely pro-social and
ethical uh or speak to you know
basic ethics and so you know i've
concluded
it it sounds to some like an
overstatement but i don't think it
is that actually unpacking this
this whole situation is crucial to the
survival of our species
because that impulse well that's what
the masters of the illusionian mysteries
proclaimed
that what they're doing that we would
all die without that
we couldn't live without it and and so
if we can
understand this the kinds of experiences
that give rise to mutual
care taking then we we have the ability
to solve all
kinds of horrors that you know our
cultures have
uh imposed on us uh and
you know there you could imagine uh uh
interfaith dialogues
that could uh uh come out
of exploration of these kinds of
experiences across
faith traditions when
and i and my guess will be uh
and that the discovery is going to be
well wait a second
the bedrock core and this is the kind of
perennial
philosophy the bedrock core of most of
these traditions
is really quite similar uh and
uh and so so whether
whether the future is integrating this
into
existing religious institutions
you know or or seeing a
evolution of our cultural institutions
you know that can incorporate this sort
of thing
is uh you know is i think a question
one of the things uh that is disquieting
to me
is that the ability of these
experiences to shift worldview is
potentially
really cult destabilizing to existing
cultural institutions
yeah well that's what happened in the
60s and it's no wonder there was
like we underestimate the magnitude of
these
processes at our apparel god only knows
what's happening at the bottom of them
yeah so it is a genie that we maybe
can't do without but
it's still fire to mix it
and and i think that accounts for the
history of psychedelics having been
discovered in some cultures
and then forgotten or suppressed i mean
look what happened in
uh you know when the spanish came over
to mexico i mean they actively
stamped out the use of psychedelics
and and and i think i think
at the core if we're not careful they
can be destabilizing the culture
and then culture is going to come come
back and demonize them as
is exactly what happened in the 60s so
i'm
i am concerned about the
excited movement toward
decriminalization and legalization
and before the before the the well
there's a
let's say an ecstatic spiritual domain
of religiosity and there's a dogmatic
disciplined traditional end of religion
and
you know the spiritual types and they
have the personality for this
are always opposed to the dogmatic types
but you know those two things have to
exist together
carl jung said was one of the most
brilliant things he ever said was that
the purpose of religious structures is
to stop people from having religious
experiences
and he was he was he was
referring to this destabilizing effect
that a
uh an untrammeled mystical experience
can have psychologically and
sociologically it's
you just can't have a million separate
religions
pop up without everything disintegrating
and so we have to figure out how to
place the genie inside the bottle and
and i mean this is why what you've done
is part of the reason it's so
fascinating to me because
for some reason you've been able to get
the balance between
tradition and discipline and empirical
reasoning and careful rationality and
skepticism
you balance that with this intense focus
on your own curiosity your sense of
meaning and
brought those together and managed it
institutionally so something that you
did worked it's right and
taking that apart and figuring out how
that can be
replicated let's say that's a that's a
crucial
future task and the decriminalization i
understand that
but you know one thing we can encourage
anyone who's listening
to this uh to consider is none of this
should be done lightly it should be done
within an ethical framework you should
do it with the
highest possible intent and reverence
and yeah and they're in their real risks
uh
so you know our people are are carefully
uh screened you know we're really
concerned about precipitation of
enduring
uh uh psychotic illness
schizophrenia uh you know we have
avoided
uh administering to anyone with a
bipolar disorder that remains to be
investigated maybe it'll work maybe it
won't
uh probably uh and
um uh and and certainly
uh the the risk of uh
of people uh engaging in dangerous
behavior if it's not
if they're not in a sufficient container
and that's where you do
get people you know running into traffic
or
or committing suicides or homicides
so so this isn't to be taken lightly
but jordan if i can just come back to
kind of
culturally and how do we integrate this
i'm almost thinking of this now in terms
of an evolutionary
sense that we you know are our
we have to evolve the cultural
institutions
that can that can create the containers
around these experiences
such that they don't threaten our
existing institutions which are
going to become reactive and demonize
them and shut it
down and and figure out the intelligent
use of these compounds and so so and
you're doing that as a scientist and now
you're inviting religious leaders to
participate in that process which seems
to me to be
i mean are they so just out of curiosity
for example
you'll have this group of religious
leaders this assembly of religious
leaders who've now undergone this
experience so
will they commune and will they
discuss collectively the implications of
this
like you know because it's necessary to
start thinking about how those
social structures might might be evolved
you you have this first batch of people
who already have made an ethical
commitment and a disciplined choice
it would be fascinating to it seems to
put them together
for three or four days and say well look
now what do we do with this
you're an e they're in a unique position
and
and to see what the what answers might
arise from that
yeah um harvard school of divinity is
uh uh initiating a psychedelic
chaplaincy program i'm and i'm not sure
of all the
domains of that but that's unbelievable
that's unbelievable yeah
wow so so pl
do you have any of you know when that's
going to be launched
let's see i think they i think they have
declared that i you'd have to go online
but uh
they're actually that should that should
solve some of their enrollment problems
well yeah but that's also relevant right
it's like look
okay now you've you've gotten on to
something here that that attracts people
well that's to be paid attention to
because
the church is having a terrible time
attracting people especially young
people
and so that can't be ignored especially
if those institutions are necessary
but right now we have no path forward
within our culture for
approval of administration of
psychedelic to uh to well persons
we're we're capable of doing these
studies
as research projects
but but uh
we don't and we have our our fda that
approves
drugs but they're approving them uh
to treat conditions of
either psychological or or physical
suffering uh right and
and so so this is part of the
co-evolution
where that needs to happen and
existential insufficiency isn't enough
of a psychiatric diagnostic category to
to to qualify but i'm not really quite
serious about that i mean
you know lots of it's it's the sense of
futility
meaningless and nihilism that's not rare
and it's it's not harmless by any
stretch of the imagination
at minimum it's staggeringly
demoralizing
at maximum it's it motivates all sorts
of terrible acts
of commission not just omission and it
it
it warps and and and hurts our
our our entire society it's not a
trivial problem
that we don't know how to deal with our
own mortality for example and no bloody
wonder it's a complicated problem
yeah so so that you know so that's
that's
one pathway forward
is application in uh
in death and dying right and and and
initially to get approval for people who
have
some psychological distress but you
could imagine
that actually changing the culture you
know it's not going to happen overnight
you know we're probably talking about a
multi-generational
process but you know we can move pretty
quick when we're motivated now
you know let me ask you one more thing
about this integration issue like
so you've given these drugs to
spiritual leaders so then i would think
okay here's a question
you situate your neck
your research project in a cathedral
and you administer the psilocybin as a
sacrament
with the music with with with the entire
transformation mass apparatus
because you know if it's reasonable to
administer to spiritual leaders
at least hypothetically it's reasonable
to investigate what happens when you put
it in an intense
i mean a lot of work went into a
cathedral a lot of work went into that
music
the entire ritual and the idea of the of
what's actually happening
being made explicit you know
i mean those experiences are already
powerful god only knows how you might
multiply them with the power of
of all of that imagery and pageantry and
tradition and
layers and layers of meaning yeah so
going back to the original
good friday experiment conducted it at
harvard
it was done in a good friday service
uh with seminary students uh
a number of whom had mystical
experiences not all of whom
whom did but that's that's what you're
talking about i mean
those are kind of sudden setting
conditions
uh that you know would be really
interesting
we've looked at this under such a narrow
range of conditions i mean you know
we're putting people
on a couch with the eye shape well you
do you to make it sterile except the
music
right yeah yeah yeah well and we're cr
we're creating the introverted
experience but we yet
yet to be explored as the extroverted
and and just experimentally as you can
appreciate there's
you know a whole lot more going on there
so it's it's a
rougher experimental paradigm to control
yeah yeah you could you could carve that
in stone
[Laughter]
thank you well thank you jordan this is
uh delightful to uh to speak with you
about this
yeah well there's so many more things i
would like to ask you about but
that was pretty good for two hours so
i'm uh
i'm so much looking forward to reading
the results of this spiritual leader
study and
um well maybe we can uh circle back once
we've published where
the long-term meditator study is
uh on its way out and we'll have the
religious
professional study hopefully out within
the next
i would hope a year maybe we can circle
back and talk a little bit further
that would be that would be great that
would be great
so all right well um happy good friday
if that's the thing that can be said
thank you thank you jordan
yeah yeah i really appreciated that the
discussion and uh i'm
well i think your work is of
what's of of what would you say
incalculable
import i mean that technically i don't
really know what to make of it
it's great that it happened and
hopefully it'll be for the good
let's hope that yeah yeah i mean if it
fits so closely with many of the themes
that you have
uh that you have developed and
advocated for that it's just really
exciting to be able to talk to you about
it so thank you
[Music]
you